Have you enjoyed studying the book
Imitate Their Faith as much as I have?
It’s a wonderful book,
isn’t it?
And I was particularly captivated
by the introduction.
There was a point in the introduction
that encouraged us
to use our imagination
when we’re reading the Bible:
to see the sights,
to hear the sounds,
to smell the aromas,
to try to capture the feelings
of the individuals
that we are reading about.
Now, of course, we don’t want
our imagination to run away with us,
but at the same time,
we do want to get
a solid mental picture
of what we’re reading.
And that’s what I’d like
to talk to you about today.
When you’re reading the Bible,
try to get the whole picture.
Now we’ll use a couple
of well-known Bible accounts to illustrate.
Have you been raised
in a stepfamily or a blended family?
If you have,
did you know that you have
something in common with Joseph,
the son of Jacob?
Joseph was raised
with ten half brothers
in a large blended family.
So now you want to try to view
this family as a composite.
You want to try to figure out
how did people mesh
or how did they clash
within this family.
What would you do?
Well, you might start by writing down
some of the characteristics
of the individual members
of the family.
What about Joseph’s half brothers
and Joseph himself?
What do you know about them?
What about Judah,
Simeon, Levi,
Dan, Naphtali
—what do you know?
So write down
their characteristics,
and try to figure out
how they might get along.
Sometimes there is
one individual incident
that’s recorded in the Bible,
but we mustn’t forget:
People’s actions
have a way of affecting other people.
So when you read
about a certain incident in the Bible,
try to imagine who
might have been affected by that incident.
Take an example.
In the book of Genesis,
we read that Jacob’s son Reuben
committed sexual immorality
with Bilhah.
Well, that had an effect
on other people without doubt.
Who was Reuben?
He was Leah’s oldest son.
Who was Bilhah?
Rachel’s handmaiden.
Do you think that there might have been
a little animosity or tension
between Leah and Rachel sometimes,
especially when you consider
how their marriages started out?
There may have been.
And it may be
that the attitudes of the women
had some bearing on the attitudes
of their sons as well.
So you take all of these things
into consideration.
Now, Bilhah had two sons,
Dan and Naphtali.
How do you think
they felt when they learned
that their oldest brother,
or half brother,
had committed fornication
with their mother?
So there could have been
tension there.
And this all goes into the mix
when we’re considering
the family as a composite.
Now, do you picture
Joseph at age 17
with ten much older half brothers,
maybe in their 30’s,
some old enough to be his father?
Not true.
The truth is that there was only
a seven-year age difference
between Joseph’s oldest brother,
Reuben, and Joseph himself.
In fact, 11 of Jacob’s sons
were born
during the seven-year period
when Jacob
was working for Laban.
Eleven sons in seven years,
how is that possible?
It’s easy, when you remember
that Jacob had two wives
and two concubines,
or secondary wives.
So there didn’t have to be
a nine-month interval
between the birth
of the children.
In fact, some could have been born
just about at the same time;
they could have been
the same age.
So when Joseph
was sold into slavery at age 17,
his oldest brother
was no more than 24.
Some of his brothers were only
a year or two older than Joseph himself.
So we’re talking
about a group of young men
in their late teens
and early 20’s,
and this might explain
some of the hotheaded reactions
that some
of those young men had.
Well, so much for the boys.
What about their father, Jacob?
What can we learn about him?
A lot.
For one thing,
he was a spiritual man.
Now, this is something
for you young brothers and sisters
who are contemplating
marriage to think about.
Jacob was willing
to go to any length
to keep his relationship
with Jehovah intact.
Let’s take an example:
Genesis 29:18.
You can follow along
on the screen as I read this.
And we’re talking
about marriage here.
Genesis 29:18.
It says:
“Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel,
“so he said:
‘I am willing to serve you seven years
for your younger daughter Rachel.’”
Now what’s the takeaway?
Jacob didn’t marry
the first person who came along,
maybe some pagan woman.
He didn’t say,
‘Well, seven years is too long to wait.
I’m going to find some Philistine woman,
and I’ll marry her.’
He was willing to wait
so that he could marry someone
who would join him
in the worship of Jehovah.
And you young folks,
if you are willing to wait,
you can be sure that you will have
Jehovah’s blessing as well.
Now Jacob was apparently also
a bit of a romantic.
Notice verse 20.
It says:
“And Jacob served seven years for Rachel,”
but notice this,
“but in his eyes
they were like just a few days
because of his love for her.”
Now, isn’t that poetic?
Jacob may have learned
to treasure his wife
by observing his parents,
Isaac and Rebekah.
It appears that they
had a strong marriage.
Just notice what we read
at Genesis 26:8,
Genesis 26:8.
It says:
“After some time had passed,
“Abimelech king of the Philistines
was looking out of the window,
and he saw Isaac,”
that’s Jacob’s father,
“displaying affection
for Rebekah his wife.”
So it appears
that Isaac and Rebekah
had a warm relationship,
a good marriage.
Now, what else
can we learn about Jacob?
There’s an interesting detail recorded
in chapter 25 and verse 27.
It says:
“As the boys got bigger, Esau,”
Jacob’s brother,
“became a skilled hunter,
a man of the field,
“but Jacob was a blameless man,
dwelling in tents.”
So Jacob liked to dwell in tents.
That might explain
the strong bond that developed
between Jacob and Joseph,
who was his youngest for many years.
Now although Jacob
liked to dwell in tents,
he was by no means a sissy.
He was a strong man,
but he was a spiritual man.
That’s something
for you young brothers to take away.
You want to be strong,
we know you do,
but spirituality
should come first.
One time, spiritual Jacob
gave his sons a beautiful lesson
on how to settle
a difference with a family member.
We read about it
at Genesis chapter 32.
And I think all of us can learn
from his example.
We learn at Genesis 32
that Jacob’s brother, Esau,
was coming to see him.
Now, they hadn’t seen
each other for 20 years,
and to say that their parting
had been difficult is an understatement.
The fact is that when they separated
more than 20 years earlier,
Esau had vowed that one day
he was going to kill his brother;
now he was coming to see him.
Now, why was he
so angry with Jacob?
It’s because Jacob had received
a blessing from their father,
and Esau was not happy.
So Esau arrives,
and 400 men are with him.
Why 400 men?
Well, the Bible doesn’t say.
But it could be
that he was trying to show
how important and prominent
he had become.
How did Jacob react?
Did he try to go tit for tat?
Did he try to show how important
and prominent he had become
with all of the blessings
he’d received?
Did he reopen old wounds?
Did he argue with his brother?
Did he say,
‘You know I was right all along,
and you, Esau,
you have been wrong’?
Did he demand an apology?
No.
There was a lot that Jacob
could have bragged about.
No question about that.
There was no doubt that Jacob
had Jehovah’s blessing.
Early on,
we read that an angel of Jehovah
had appeared to him
and said:
“I am Jehovah
“the God of Abraham your father
and the God of Isaac.
“The land on which you are lying,
“to you I am going to give it
and to your offspring.
“I am with you,
“and I will safeguard you
wherever you go . . .
I will not leave you.”
Well, that’s quite a blessing,
isn’t it?
But there’s more.
For a portion
of the previous night
—that is, the night before Esau
and Jacob met up—
Jacob had wrestled with an angel,
and as a result,
he had managed
to receive another blessing.
But Jacob didn’t flaunt
his blessings.
Instead, he humbled himself.
In fact, he even bowed down
seven times before his brother
in front of his wives
and his 11 sons.
So Jacob settled
any lingering difference with Esau
not with his fists,
not with a bragging tongue,
not with a weapon,
but humbly,
like a real man
—like a real, spiritual man.
In contrast,
how did Jacob’s ten sons
settle their difference
with Joseph?
Like a bunch of cowards.
It was 10 to 1
against Joseph.
First, they decided
to kill their brother,
and then they delivered him
up into slavery.
Those jealous young men
didn’t learn a thing
from their father’s
excellent spiritual example.
Well, if you’re on the outs
with a member of your family,
if you had
a serious difficulty with someone,
could you try to settle the matter
peacefully as Jacob did?
If the person tries to apologize,
be gracious about it.
Don’t make it difficult
for him to apologize.
Don’t dredge up
all of the unnecessary details
about the past.
You may be in the right,
as Jacob was,
but isn’t the important thing
to make peace?
Jehovah loves the peacemakers.
Well, what else
do we learn about Jacob?
We learn that he wasn’t
his father’s favorite.
Let’s look
at Genesis chapter 25
verse 28.
“And Isaac loved Esau
“because it meant game in his mouth,
whereas Rebekah loved Jacob.”
Now, this story may resonate
with many of you out there,
especially if you’ve grown up
in a large family
or perhaps you’ve had
a number of brothers and sisters.
Now, we know
your parents claim
that they always treated
all of you the same,
that they never ever
had a preference.
But ask the kids,
Was there anyone in the family
who was the favorite?
They all know.
‘She was!’
They know this.
The parents don’t realize it,
but they are giving preferential treatment.
And so this happens,
and it can be disconcerting at times.
Imagine this scenario:
Imagine that you have a couple
who have two children, two sons.
One is a pioneer.
He has never given his parents
a moment’s grief.
The other
never accepted the truth,
but he has done well
in business,
and as a result,
he has been generous to his parents,
and the parents are grateful,
very grateful.
And the pioneer
often hears the parents bragging
about the successes
that his brother has had in business.
Well, the pioneer can’t help
the parents materially very much,
and so he feels that there’s
a bit of partiality there.
Is it hurtful?
Yes.
That is life.
It’s chemistry.
It’s just chemistry.
But the pioneer needs to realize
that Jehovah God
appreciates his work.
His heavenly Father
loves him very much
for the work
that he is doing for His name.
Now, Jacob must have known
that Isaac loved his brother
more than he loved him.
And perhaps he vowed
that when he had children,
he would treat them all the same.
Well, if he did,
he didn’t keep that promise, did he?
Everyone knew
that Joseph was the favorite.
Well, have you noticed what we had to do
to make a composite of this family?
We had to read
from several different chapters of the Bible
—Genesis 25, 26, 28, 29, 32.
You can’t always get
a complete picture of an incident
by reading just one chapter,
just by reading the chapter you are reading.
Sometimes you have to extract details
from other chapters of the Bible.
Now let’s consider
one more example
where getting the complete picture
can enrich our understanding.
This is going to be
a shorter one.
We’re going to consider
the story of Naaman.
Now, you remember the story.
At 2 Kings 5:1,
we learn that Naaman
was the chief of the army
of Ben-hadad II,
the king of Syria.
But he was a leper.
Now Ben-hadad learned
that there was a prophet in Israel
Elisha who could heal him
of his leprosy.
And so he told Naaman
that he should go to Israel
and go to the prophet
and get healed.
And so word was sent
to the king of Israel by letter,
and the king of Israel was asked
to send Naaman to Elisha.
Now, when you think of it,
this was a strange request
because Israel and Syria
were often at odds.
Sometimes there were
wars between them,
and now, here you have
the king of Syria sending his general,
the one who is going to head
the army against Israel,
and saying: ‘Well, I’d like my general
to be a more effective general.
Could you please make sure
that he gets healed?’
Well, somehow,
he’s sent to Elisha
and Elisha kindly heals Naaman
and Naaman becomes
a worshipper of Jehovah.
Well, we can imagine,
remember we’re talking
about using our imagination,
we can imagine
that when Naaman returned to Syria,
Ben-hadad had lots of nice things
to say about Elisha.
So then, everyone lived
happily ever after, right?
If we didn’t read on,
we might think so.
But that’s not
the end of the story.
In the next chapter,
chapter 6,
we learn that Ben-hadad
declared war against Israel.
Now, if Naaman
was still the chief of the army,
he’d be in an awkward position.
Was he going
to lead the armies of Syria
against fellow worshippers
of Jehovah?
But it gets worse.
Ben-hadad learns that Elisha
is revealing the Syrians’ war strategies
to the king of Israel,
so he sends a large army
to capture Elisha
—the very man who
had healed his general.
So much for gratitude.
Now, it’s interesting
that Naaman is not mentioned
as being at the head
of those armies.
Did he get out of it somehow?
Don’t ask me.
If he’s resurrected,
you’ll have to ask him.
What lesson can we learn?
That the gratitude of the world
is fleeting.
Some of us may get excited
if there’s a favorable article
about Jehovah’s Witnesses
in a newspaper
or if some TV personality
makes a kind statement about us.
But what did Jehovah God say?
Genesis 3:15:
“I will put enmity
between you and the woman.”
So Jehovah’s organization
and Satan’s organization
are always going to be at odds.
Bible reading isn’t a chore.
It’s a joy.
Get the whole picture
of what you’re reading,
and you’ll enjoy it even more.
We wish you all
Jehovah’s rich blessing
as you continue
to enhance your appreciation
for this sacred volume.